
--- PAGE 29 ---
 
28 
 
 


--- PAGE 30 ---
 
29 
 
PART 2 - GUIDELINES FOR THE EFFECTIVE USE OF KETAMINE 
 CLINICALLY MANIFESTING A STANDARD OF CARE  
A REFERENCE FOR CONSUMERS AND PRACTITIONERS 
Presented as Information - to those contemplating using ketamine for healing and therapy, for 
potential consumers seeking information on the best practice of clinical ketamine 
administration, and for ketamine providers as a standard of care reference for the clinical 
practice of ketamine. 
The Basics 
Situating the Therapeutic Use of Ketamine as a Psychedelic Medicine 
● Ketamine has an FDA indication - its 1970 approval - for administration as an 
anesthetic to humans and in veterinary medicine. 


--- PAGE 31 ---
 
30 
 
● At lower dosages than those necessary for producing anesthesia, ketamine 
produces effects that impact consciousness. This is dependent on the dosage of the 
medicine administered, the rapidity of its absorption (which depends on how it is 
given - the route of administration), and the particular sensitivity of the recipient. 
● Presently, ketamine is the only psychedelic medicine that is legal to use. 
● This has come about because ketamine is indicated for anesthesia as a DEA 
Schedule 3 medicine. Its ‘off-label’ use has been vigorously explored for psychiatric 
indications in the last 25 years and ketamine is being supplied under varying 
degrees of medical supervision - from mail order distribution with virtually no 
supervision, to highly developed clinical centers that recognize its potential, its risks, 
and its therapeutic value. For its legal use, ketamine must be prescribed by a 
licensed practitioner - the medical specialty not having been specified. 
● Like all psychedelic medicines, ketamine’s effects are not confined to specific 
diagnoses or conditions. Ketamine when utilized clinically may be of therapeutic 
value for depression, trauma, PTSD, OCD, eating disorders, identity struggles, 
relational issues, sexuality, social connection, etc. This depends on the context, 
training and development of the practitioner, as well as the presentation and 
situation of the patient(s). 
● All psychedelic medicines were made illegal and put out of reach by the DEA into 
Schedule I at varying dates. MDMA has gone through rigorous clinical trials and is 
still awaiting approval for clinical use. Psilocybin (mushrooms) is going through the 
FDA hurdles. Cannabis remains illegal at the Federal level of proscription but has 
variously been decriminalized in the majority of states - and some states and 
localities have partially decriminalized MDMA, mushrooms and other psychedelics. 
● Beginning in the 1800s (cannabis use may extend as far back as 8000 years ago) and 
escalating in the 1960s to the present, mind altering substances have moved center 
stage in Western public use and gradually in clinical medicine and 
psychiatry/psychotherapy. A most welcome awareness has occurred of the 
worldwide Indigenous peoples embedded use of psychedelic medicines in their 
cultures. In the times when there was no prohibition, such as in the 1960s, and the 
1980s for MDMA, their use in clinical medicine changed the nature of 
psychiatric/psychotherapy medicine. 
● Medicines that have the potential for rapidly altering consciousness and the course 
of lives revolutionized the therapeutic practice attendant on their administration. 
Many hours long sessions, Integration practices, the greater intimate exposure of 
practitioners to their patients, the nature of the effects and therefore the 
requirement for ongoing support, the breakage of the monopoly of the 50-minute 
analytic hour, the need for provision of safe and attractive settings for sessions  - 
these and more created a new opportunity for assisting human beings in their 
troubles, struggles, and opportunities. 


--- PAGE 32 ---
 
31 
 
● Moreover, the Pharma world basically has been static in its production of new types 
of medicines with improved clinical impacts - this for too many years. Ketamine and 
psychedelics represent a breakout from the partially successful conventional 
treatments. The unfortunate continued criminalization of their use has stultified the 
potential for mind altering medicines to be applied legally and for their 
methodological development to benefit humans. 
● This is where ketamine assisted psychotherapy provides a path for both significant 
patient benefits and the development of strategies for its application. 
Ketamine In Its Clinical Application 
• Ketamine provides a psychedelic experience that varies in its depth and effects. As 
an alteration in how we think, feel and experience ourselves and the world, 
however momentary, that experience deserves to be heard, shared, and processed 
in a format we call Integration. This enables exploration of what has been 
experienced; how we may be different and changed from it; the handling of 
confusion and difficulty; the provision of support, interest, and concern by the 
practitioner making connection and helping to protect from isolation and 
introversion; and the retention and incorporation of the values, insights, and the 
naked transformative experiences of the journey undertaken. This is the essential 
basis of harm reduction. It is the catalyst for personal liberation and healing. 
• Historically, we have come to call this process ‘assisted psychotherapy’ and it 
differentiates the application of psychedelic medicines from ‘drugs.’ For ketamine, 
there has been a split in how it has been administered, the most widespread 
applications being clinics providing intravenous ketamine generally without the 
sharing possibility or support provided as above. The same is true for the basically 
unsupported distribution of lozenges over the web. We view this as ketamine being 
treated as a drug, much like any other - the problem being that ketamine is a potent 
psychedelic and subject to misuse if not clinically monitored. 
• Misuse of ketamine has been studied in in-person clinical settings and reassuringly 
has only rarely occurred there - and this with those who have had pre-existing drug 
dependencies. In comparison, ketamine misuse and dependency has been widely 
reported among recipients of mail-order distribution. 
• Psychedelic medicines are mind altering and it is our view that any practitioner 
providing such medicine be personally familiar with the medicine and its effects. 
This has been the process historically with psychedelic medicine and an essential 
part of the workup of MDMA for prescriptive use. Ignorance of the medicine means 
that a practitioner has little sense of what their patient is experiencing and cannot 
relate to the effects on their patient - and generally is not interested in the 
experience and its impact on the person. This tends to be the experience reported 
by patients receiving ketamine in medicalized settings. Anesthesiologists tend to 
have been at the forefront of the creation of ketamine intravenous clinics and 


--- PAGE 33 ---
 
32 
 
generally are not trained in psychiatry and psychotherapy though they are 
administering ketamine for psychiatric indications. 
• While administering ketamine as a drug has a success rate - about 30% for 
remission from Treatment Resistant Depression, the basis for this is complex and 
most likely includes a direct effect of ketamine, and importantly the time-out from 
usual mind that is psychologically valuable and impactful. Ketamine assisted 
psychotherapy (KAP) has a much higher success rate when practiced fully to the 
standard of care discussed herein. 
• Methodologies for practicing ketamine psychotherapy are as various as there are 
schools of psychotherapy. There are many approaches to being with human beings 
as healing strategies. There is no single best way, although there are many claims 
and navigation of the field by consumers can be difficult. Assisted psychotherapy 
adds another dimension as the understanding of best practices evolves to surround 
the ketamine experience. This includes modifications of existing psychotherapeutic 
strategies and breaking ground that encompasses the new paradigm forming for 
psychedelic psychotherapy. 
• There is no uniformity to the methodology of KAP practices and the duration of 
sessions will vary from practitioner to practitioner. A minimum stay is 2 hours, but 
up to 3 hours is more desirable. A quiet space for recovery after a session concludes 
is a must. KAP therapists need to sit for their patients as long as necessary for their 
recovery and no patient should be sent home until they are safe to be released. 
Rides and supportive persons giving rides are preferred.  
• The most important measure found in studies of psychotherapeutic success has 
been the experience of the warmth, attention, and openness of the therapist to 
their patients. With the prolonged and vulnerable nature of ketamine and 
psychedelic sessions in general, this is even of greater importance. 
 


--- PAGE 34 ---
 
33 
 
 


--- PAGE 35 ---
 
34 
 
The KAP Experience as Standard of Care for Ketamine Administration 
The particulars of the actual administration of ketamine are left to practitioners and can be 
found in references below. 
• The KAP experience has many components that include: 
▪ 
A comprehensive evaluation and assessment of the patient, their 
history, their experiences with substances, their history of trauma, 
their relationship history, their social and family histories and current 
situations, work and financial statuses, psychotherapy, and more. It 
needs to be an approach to as complete an understanding of the 
patient and their situation as is possible. 
▪ 
In person preparatory meetings with prescribers and therapists 
center on becoming familiar with the person, their pain and 
struggles, their view of themselves and the world, a sense of their 
positive attributes and values. The process is intended to create an 
engagement that is designed to lead to the trust necessary for having 
ketamine treatment. 
▪ 
Finances and insurance will be discussed. While ketamine treatment 
itself is not covered by insurance, psychotherapy may be covered by 
the specific insurance plan and a partial reimbursement made 
possible. Some practitioners volunteer to offer a sliding scale.  
▪ 
Based on this thorough assessment and a meticulous Informed 
Consent process, an initial treatment plan is created and discussed 
with the patient.  
▪ 
The ability to predict the course of treatment is limited and tends to 
become somewhat more defined after a first session reveals the 
patient’s sensitivity to ketamine and any side effects such as nausea, 
as well as any difficult emotional reactions. 
▪ 
KAP is explained, discussed and questions answered. Consultation 
with providers is arranged. Important relationships are included as 
indicated and/or as requested by patients. For adolescents, family 
therapy is a component part. KAP is available to couples and to 
families. Inclusion of collateral relations may evolve during 
treatment. 
▪ 
The treating team will decide on who the principal therapist will be, 
and if a dyadic approach is necessary, especially at the inception of 
treatment. This will be based on the complexity of the problems to 
be addressed, medical issues, and emotional reactivity.   


--- PAGE 36 ---
 
35 
 
▪ 
The ingredients of a KAP session include music, comfort, reclining 
chairs, eyeshades, and an office setting that is conducive to 
relaxation and suggests that warmth and compassion are present. 
▪ 
The essential components of a KAP session are:  
o The Opening Period which sets the stage, frames the 
work, creates the connection between therapist(s) 
and patient, reviews and updates stresses and 
concerns, and prepares for receiving the medication. 
o The Ketamine Experience 
o The Integration - focusing on what was experienced, 
its impact and meaning, any difficulties, going home 
and concerns about the aftermath. 
▪ 
Follow-up and Integration Sessions should occur within days of the 
session. A sense of the course of treatment will begin to take shape.   
▪ 
Given ketamine’s flexibility as a medicine, there are many 
approaches possible using different strategies for doses, session 
intervals, combinations of routes of administration, 
psychotherapeutic strategies, and the creation of protocols specific 
to diagnoses, and specific to the particular needs of patients. 
 


--- PAGE 37 ---
 
36 
 
 


--- PAGE 38 ---
 
37 
 
The Administration of Ketamine in Clinical Settings 
▪ 
Ketamine is administered through multiple routes. The most common and 
reliable for absorption are the intravenous (IV), the intramuscular (IM), the 
mouth, (lozenges and rapid dissolving tablets) and the nose (Intranasal RS and 
Spravato-esketamine.) Ketamine is readily absorbed through the mucosal linings 
of the mouth, and nose. The anus and vagina are also lined with mucosa, but 
these routes are much less frequently used in clinical practice. Absorption from 
the gastrointestinal tract from swallowing ketamine is generally less robust and 
can increase nausea.  Injections via subcutaneous administration are sometimes 
used but absorption is irregular.  
▪ 
The rapidity of effect varies with each route. There is essentially full absorption 
when ketamine is administered by IV or IM routes.   
Generally, the IV route is administered as a drip over 40-60 minutes depending 
on the practice. Onset takes some time for sufficient ketamine to be delivered. 
Proponents of the IV method claim they have better control of the ketamine 
experience as they are able to regulate the rate of the drip administration and 
can easily shut the drip off. The truth is that ketamine is not an on-off 
experience and once ketamine is in you, it persists according to the rate of your 
metabolism of the medicine. Ketamine’s half-life is 2.2 hours and its only active 
metabolite - norketamine - has a half-life of about 1.2 hours. 
▪ 
The IM administered ketamine tends to have a rapid onset - two to three 
minutes and a rapid peak. Control of the amount administered and the depth of 
the experience is related to the dose administered and if there is repetition of 
the injection. Two to three injections spaced apart is a common practice and can 
amplify the depth of the experience and its duration.  
▪ 
There are two forms for the provision of oral-buccal (mouth) administration of 
ketamine - waxy troches and rapid dissolving tablets (rdts, or odts). A common 
mistake is to believe the lozenge/rdt is the source of the ketamine and when 
they dissolve, ketamine has been absorbed and one can spit out or swallow the 
saliva. This myth has also fueled online distribution of ketamine for over 
prescription of rdt's and preparation of unnecessarily high doses of the rdts - 
plus recommendations for too short a holding period of the material in the 
mouth.  
▪ 
The lozenge/rdts are a ketamine delivery vehicle much like coffee delivers 
caffeine. The dissolution of the lozenge/rdt puts the ketamine contained in 
them into the saliva. It is the saliva that makes contact with the mucosa 
enabling the absorption of ketamine into the bloodstream and then the brain. 
The saliva needs to be retained in the mouth and circulated—we call it 
‘swishing’ to increase contact with the mucosa and have the ketamine 
absorbed. 


--- PAGE 39 ---
 
38 
 
▪ 
The intranasal route of administration provides ketamine directly to the 
mucosal lining of the nose. It is formulated with agents that increase viscosity to 
help its retention, though dripping down the back of the throat can be 
uncomfortable. The dosage of intranasal preparations varies depending on 
practitioners and formulating pharmacies. Time of onset of the ketamine 
experience and amount absorbed tend to be somewhat more rapid with greater 
absorption than the oral-buccal route. Early on in our learning about how to 
practice with ketamine, we observed patients who had become ketamine 
dependent through intranasal overuse of the spray. They would go from nostril 
to nostril instilling the spray. As the lozenge/rdts are of a fixed dose and less 
comfortable to overuse, we focused our practice on using that method. 
Occasionally, we utilize the nasal spray route but only in-office. 
▪ 
In general, the higher the dose, the deeper the experience and the less memory 
of the experience. The higher the dose the more the five senses are diminished 
in their ability to be appreciated. The higher the dose, the greater the 
separation from this reality and the greater the sense of disorientation and 
orientation to other realities.  
▪ 
Some degree of ‘ego-dissolution'/letting go/dissociation/psychedelic is essential 
for ketamine’s effect. This is an inherent part of the ketamine experience and its 
healing and mind-heart opening potential. It is spurious to downplay this - and it 
confuses patients and practitioners alike. The altered states of consciousness 
that ketamine engenders present the opportunity for change and the necessity 
for processing and integration. 
A view of common and safe dosages for each route of administration:  
* To begin, an important caveat - ketamine dosages are often expressed in 
milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg), in other words based on the recipient’s weight. 
While this has some value in terms of calculating the possible effect of a dose 
and has a relationship to much higher anesthetic doses - we call our dosage 
range ‘pre-anesthetic.’  
* The effect of ketamine - and this is true for all psychedelic medicines - is based 
on each individual’s sensitivity to ketamine. This is not a given and cannot be 
predicted in advance of the experience itself. Therefore the rule is, ‘You can 
always give more, but you cannot take away what has been given.’ In our 
experience, some very small individuals require high doses for effect. And some 
very large individuals require only moderate doses. 
* Fortunately, ketamine is an extraordinarily safe medicine and has been in 
clinical use since 1970. Ketamine does not impair respiration. It has been used - 
and is in use - in a large variety of situations at much higher dosages than those 
that are used in psychiatric/psychotherapy practices. 
* IV Dose Range: Original clinical practice - in an unsuccessful effort to avoid 
dissociative/psychedelic experiences - was and often still is 0.5mg/kg 


--- PAGE 40 ---
 
39 
 
administered over 40-60 minutes. With experience and in the interest of 
efficacy, the range has expanded to 1.5mg/kg, even 2.0 mg/kg. Obviously, 
attention to the individual response to the dose has become influential on 
increasing the range of IV administration. 
* IM Dose Ranges (actual doses, not mg/kg): 
a) 4mg-15 mg for a softening letting go that enables a psychotherapy 
session - barely perceived. 
b) 10mg-35mg depending on sensitivity for what we term 
psychorevelation sessions in which the ability to process inner 
experiences therapeutically is present and easier, usually after a 
short deeper period. Access to mental contents and the ability to 
engage with the therapist is present. 
c) 25mg-60mg - a low to moderate dose that depending on a person's 
sensitivity may be profound. 
d) 60mg-130mg - generally the range for profound experiences - The 
Transformational Space - out of body, out of time and this reality. 
e) 130mg-200mg - for those who have been previously assessed for 
degree of effect and require more ketamine to reach The 
Transformational Space. 
f) >200 mg - generally not a good idea. This is where in the use of 
ketamine outside of clinical practices, individuals make mistakes of 
poor judgement. 
* Oral-Buccal Lozenge/Rdt Ranges: 
a) Our clinic uses 50mg and 100mg rdts. We don’t use lozenges - or 
troches as they are called - as the rdt dissolves in a minute or so 
putting ketamine into the saliva much more quickly than the troche 
does. In fact, we developed the rdt that is in common use in 
collaboration with our formulating pharmacy and sharing our 
formula with other practices.  
b) We generally start our evaluation of a new patient’s sensitivity to 
ketamine with a single 100mg rdt. In that dosage escalation session, 
we may increase at an interval up to an additional 2-100mg rdts. This 
process allows us to understand sensitivity and plan future sessions - 
IM and/or rdts - plus the dose for at-home sessions with rdts when 
patients are ready to supplement their office work with supervised 
at-home sessions. The same dosage escalation assessment may be 
done with IM injections. 
c) Our dosage range is from 100-400mgs. In other words, 1-4 rdts at 
once. 


--- PAGE 41 ---
 
40 
 
d) The time period in which the saliva is circulating in the mouth is 
critical for good absorption. Unfortunately, there are no studies of 
time optimization. We practice and recommend 15 minutes for saliva 
to be in the mouth. As only a portion of the ketamine available in the 
saliva is absorbed - perhaps 20-40% - the longer the saliva is held in 
the mouth, the more ketamine is absorbed. 
e) Rdt dosages prescribed at large are various, as are the ketamine 
amounts per rdt, as are the times suggested for holding saliva.  
200mg rdts are common, 400mg rdts are distributed and even 
800mg rdts. We are aware of some online distributors suggesting 
doses of 1200mg and having patients swallow when the rdt dissolves, 
or suggesting a very limited time for holding saliva in the mouth. All 
this is good for is repeat prescriptions. 
Our suggestion is using up to 400mg in a session held for 15 minutes. 
This applies to in-office and supervised at-home sessions.  
f) Minimally supervised distribution for home-use of higher doses is an 
encouragement for misuse, diversion, and dependence. 
g) This goes to the heart of the matter. For the essential benefit of 
ketamine comes from some degree of a time-out, a break from usual 
life, its struggles and obsessions. While we are proponents of the 
benefit of the psychedelic Transformational Space, healing and new 
mind comes from the meditative time-out and the reformation that 
accompanies that interval of freedom. Psychedelic journeys can be a 
wonderful transformative aspect of ketamine - and are best pursued 
in the clinical setting. But letting go and reforming oneself is the 
essential medicine. 
* Intranasal:  
a) The spectrum of ketamine’s applications is still enlarging. Spravato, 
which is esketamine, one of the two isomers or components of 
ketamine in its usual prescriptive form, was approved by the FDA for 
psychiatrists treating treatment resistant depression. Recently, it has 
received insurance coverage making it desirable from a consumer’s 
financial point of view. The caveat is that it has limited effect 
according to the clinical trials that led to its approval. Also, it is 
provided under restricted circumstances. Importantly, it is not 
provided within an assisted psychotherapy format. As it is now 
inexpensive when insurance covers it, consumers are attracted to its 
prescription along with the bona fide provided by FDA approval. 
b) There is an illusion created by patenting and advertising that 
esketamine is unique and different from the ketamine that has been 


--- PAGE 42 ---
 
41 
 
prescribed now for about 55 years. The fact is that the commonly 
prescribed ketamine is 50% esketamine and that anyone receiving 
ketamine in any of its formats is receiving esketamine. Given the 
limitation on Spravato’s actual dose, it has been the case that over 
many years’ time, practitioners using intranasal ketamine for 
psychiatric purposes have exceeded the Spravato dose - no doubt 
achieving greater efficacy and at a fraction of the cost. 
c) Nasal preparations of ketamine (the RS common format) are in 
widespread use within in-office practices. They come in a variety of 
strengths - generally 10mg per squirt, a squirt being 0.1ml of liquid - 
and up to 20 mg/squirt. Intranasal administration is an effective 
method for introducing ketamine to new patients gradually, 
assessing the impact of progressive administrations in a timed 
sequence. It is effective for low dose psychorevelation sessions; for a 
gradual relaxation before having the higher dose IM experience; and 
for a moderate ketamine experience. We suggest a limit of 200mg 
per intranasal session. The cautionary is for the misuse potential of at 
home distribution. 

